Cloning Zwift on iOS Part 3: HealthKit and a WatchOS App!
Published on May 03, 2019.
I’ve been a bit slow to update my blog series about trying to make a clone of
Zwift, but not because I’ve stopped working on it.
Rather, I’ve been able to use
the “MVP” of what I’ve built so far in parts
1 and 2,
and I was finding that the time I spent working on my app could be used actually
working out. Like, I literally would write an implementation of something, but
it would take so much of my time that I couldn’t test it out and I’d have to go
to bed… Still, I was missing a few important features in my app, so I’ve been
slowly working on them in between working on my fitness.
Hooking up the Apple Watch
One of the great things about Zwift is how much support they provide for
different fitness accessories, including the Apple Watch.
Unfortunately, the Apple Watch hardware is not set up to allow arbitrary Bluetooth connections like
my exercise bike was in part 1.
Instead, to access the user’s health information
like heart rate, you need to write a full blown WatchOS app!
Luckily, this wasn’t my first rodeo as I worked on the Apple Watch app for
Starbucks, so I was able to add a Watch app extension target in my project pretty quickly.
I Googled for how to get a user’s heart rate programmatically, came across a
promising StackOverflow post
with a link to a Github
project, and was able to get it implemented myself.
However, as I looked at the
copy-pasta code, it seemed sort of wrong to me.
The code was starting a workout
session, but then created an object query that would run a closure whenever a
new heart rate sample (older than a certain date) was added by the workout.
This seems like a really roundabout way to get heart rate samples, and I wondered if
Apple had a better API to accomplish this.
Implementing HealthKit
I ended up finding some Apple sample
code that showed a better way to fetch heart rate data.
The solution is to use some
new features introduced in WatchOS 5 that allow for creation of a workout
directly on the Apple Watch.
The Apple doc I linked explains it pretty well, but
the steps are:
In code it looks something like this:
Rather than add some UI to the watch app to start a workout session, the iPhone
version of HKHealthStore has a function called
startWatchApp(with:completion:) which will send a workout configuration to the watch to facilitate the creation
of a workout.
All I need to do is call that function when my workout on the
iPhone app starts and my watch app will respond by starting a HealthKit workout
session which starts measuring things like heart rate (and calculating its own
estimated calories burned).
I was now able to get the heart rate as the watch was reading it, and update
whatever display on the watch I wanted to.
That was only half the story though.
In Zwift the heart rate shows up in the user interface, and I wanted to mimic
that myself. Since I couldn’t access the workout session directly from the phone
I’d have to send the heart rate info back to the main app from the watch.
Back to the App
This blog post isn’t about Watch apps, so I won’t go over that aspect of this
feature too much.
I basically used the WatchConnectivity session to send
messages back to the app with a dictionary containing the new heart rate.
And after all of that programming, I’d like to present you with the most
difficult video I’ve ever shot: on an iPad, while balancing on an exercise bike,
recording both my wrist watch with my heart rate AND the app showing the exact
same heart rate!
I also rigged up an initial interface that shows which workout segment I’m on,
the next segment coming up, the progress through the segment and my progress for
the entire workout, along with stats like calories burned (determined by the
bike), cadence and distance traveled.
At this point I have a pretty functional app!
But seeing the extensive APIs of
HealthKit made me want to add more and more to my app.
This is scope creep in
action. See the documentation of
HKWorkoutBuilder to see all of the data and metadata you can store.
I ended up sending a few more
messages from the app back to the watch so I could store more data to the workout:
At the end of a workout, I send the start and end times, along with the total
calories burned and distance traveled.
This isn’t really necessary because the
watch already makes a guess about the calories burned and the distance isn’t
real because it’s on a stationary bike.
But I thought it might be interesting to
see how that data is represented.
I also toyed around with sending segment data but I haven’t seen it visually
represented anywhere in the workout view.
I wanted to see more detail about the
workout in the Apple Activity app so I also sent the name of the workout as the
HKMetadataKeyWorkoutBrandName value, though I’m not sure that’s what it’s
intended for! Here’s what the workouts look like in the Activity app and the
Health app’s workout data:
One more fun but optional thing I thought of and added was a wrist tap reminder
when I got close to the end of a segment.
Sometimes I’m just in the zone and not
paying attention to the fact that I need to ramp up or ramp down for the next
section, so when there’s 5 seconds left in a segment I send a message to the
watch from the phone to tap my wrist and send a reminder:
One of the nice things about writing your own workout app is that you don’t need
to wait for a third party developer to implement any ideas you have for the app!
I think that’s actually the only nice thing…
Anyway, I’m pretty happy with the results.
Next up, I plan on adding a bit of
visual polish to the interface and maybe even create an app icon!
I also want to
aggregate the data like heart rate info, watt effort, etc and keep track of
statistics and chart the data, perhaps in real time.
I find it very motivating
to compare my effort in the same exact workout across different days to see if
I’m improving (maybe by measuring heart rate average).
As usual, my changes are in Github in
case you happen to have the same exact exercise bike as me or are curious how I
implemented certain things.